# Java Basics
self-study

THEORY

#Data Type	#Size	    #Description
byte	    1 byte	    Stores whole numbers from -128 to 127
short	    2 bytes	    Stores whole numbers from -32,768 to 32,767
int 	    4 bytes	    Stores whole numbers from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647
long	    8 bytes	    Stores whole numbers from -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807
float	    4 bytes	    Stores fractional numbers. Sufficient for storing 6 to 7 decimal digits
double	  8 bytes	    Stores fractional numbers. Sufficient for storing 15 decimal digits
boolean	  1 bit 	    Stores true or false values
char	    2 bytes	    Stores a single character/letter or ASCII values


#Operators in Java
Java supports a rich set of operators that can be classified into categories as below :

Operator Category	Operators
Arithmetic operators	+,-,/,*,%
Relational operators	<, >, <=, >=,==, !=
Logical operators	&& , ||
Assignment operator	=, +=, −=, ×=, ÷=, %=, &=, ^=, |=, <<=, >>=, >>>=
Increment and Decrement operator	++ , - -
Conditional operators	?:
Bitwise operators	^, &, |
Special operators	. (dot operator to access methods of class)


#Scope of Variables
Local	                                          Instance	                                                  Class/Static

Declared in methods, constructors, or blocks	  
                                                Declared in a class, but outside a method/block	            
                                                                                                            Same as instance, but with static keyword


Created when block is entered, destroyed upon block exit	
                                              Created when an object is created (new). When space is allocated for a block on the heap, a slot for each instance var is created.	                                                                                  
                                                                                                            Created when program starts, destroyed when program ends.


No access modifiers.	                          
                                              Access modifiers OK. Visible to all methods & constructors in class.	
                                                                                                            Access modifiers OK. Visible to all methods & constructors in class.


No default values.	                            Have default values.	                                      Have default values.



#Access Modifiers and Visibility

N/A	                          Public      Protected     Default     Private
Same Class	                    Y	            Y	          Y	          Y
Same Package Subclass	          Y	            Y	          Y         	N
Same Package Non-subclass	      Y	            Y	          Y         	N
Different Package Subclass	    Y	            Y	          N	          N
Different Package Non-subclass	Y	            N	          N	          N

- Top-level Classes & interfaces cannot be private or protected
- Methods declared public in superclass must be public in all subclasses
- Methods declared protected in superclass must be public or protected in subclasses
- Private methods are not inherited



#Reserved Words
Also known as keywords, are particular words which are predefined in Java and cannot be used as variable or object name. Some of the important keywords are :

#Keywords	Usage
abstract	used to declare an abstract class.
catch	used to catch exceptions generated by try statements.
class	used to declare a class.
enum	defines a set of constants
extends	indicates that class is inherited
final	indicates the value cannot be changed
finally	used to execute code after the try-catch structure.
implements	used to implement an interface.
new	used to create new objects.
static	used to indicate that a variable or a method is a class method.
super	used to refer to the parent class.
this	used to refer to the current object in a method or constructor.
throw	used to explicitly throw an exception.
throws	used to declare an exception.
try	block of code to handle an exception


#Java Inner Classes
Java inner class or nested class is a class which is declared inside the class or interface.
We use inner classes to logically group classes and interfaces in one place so that it can be more readable and maintainable.
Additionally, it can access all the members of outer class including private data members and methods.

Advantage of java inner classes
There are basically three advantages of inner classes in java. They are as follows:
1) Nested classes represent a special type of relationship that is it can access all the members (data members and methods) of outer class including private.
2) Nested classes are used to develop more readable and maintainable code because it logically group classes and interfaces in one place only.
3) Code Optimization: It requires less code to write.

Difference between nested class and inner class in Java
Inner class is a part of nested class. Non-static nested classes are known as inner classes.

Types of Nested classes

There are two types of nested classes non-static and static nested classes.The non-static nested classes are also known as inner classes.

Non-static nested class (inner class)
- Member inner class
- Anonymous inner class
- Local inner class
Static nested class

Type	                      Description
Member Inner Class	        A class created within class and outside method.
Anonymous Inner Class	      A class created for implementing interface or extending class. Its name is decided by the java compiler.
Local Inner Class	          A class created within method.
Static Nested Class	        A static class created within class.
Nested Interface	          An interface created within class or interface.


















